---
title: "The Genius of TOTP 2 Factor-Auth"
date: "2023-07-30"
img: "/2fa/guns.webp"
tags: ["sleep", "life", "college", "musings"]
---

The Secure Dance of Time and Secrets for Enhanced Security

---

## Prologue

I recently enabled 2-factor authentication with Google Authenticator for most of
my accounts. It implements multi-factor authentication services using the
time-based one-time password (TOTP) and HMAC-based one-time password (HOTP) for
authenticating users of software applications.

I was intrigued by how it works offline. So, I delved into it and was deeply
impressed by the mechanics behind it. Consequently, I decided to write about it.

<img src="/images/2fa/google.webp" />

## The Biscuit

To understand the concept of 2FA, let’s take a trip back to 1981 during the Cold
War era. President Ronald Reagan faced a critical security situation when he was
shot, and the “Biscuit” — a plastic card containing secret codes for launching
nuclear weapons — went missing temporarily.

### Multi-factor auth

The Biscuit served as an example of multi-factor authentication, as it required
“something you have” (the physical card), “something you know” (memorizing the
correct code on the card), and “something you are” (surrounded by top-secret
security infrastructure).

### Factors

Multi-factor authentication is a security process that verifies your identity
using two or more of the following factors:

1. Something you know: This is typically a password or a Personal Identification
   Number (PIN). While passwords are widely used, they have their limitations,
   such as being susceptible to hacking and phishing attempts.
2. Something you are: This involves biometric information, like fingerprints or
   facial recognition. Biometrics offer strong proof of identity but can’t be
   changed if compromised.

3. Something you have: This factor includes physical objects like bank cards,
   tokens, or smartphones. The possession of these objects is used to confirm
   your identity.

## TOTP 2FA

The Time-based One-time Password (TOTP) algorithm is widely used for
implementing 2FA. It generates time-based tokens and relies on a shared “seed”
or “constant factor” between the user and the service provider.

<img src="/images/2fa/hmac.webp" />

Alongside this seed, a “moving factor” is employed, which is based on time.
Commonly, the moving factor corresponds to the current time (UNIX time is used),
and by combining the seed and the time, a unique token is produced. The token
remains valid for a specific duration, typically around 30 seconds, after which
it changes to a new value, providing a fresh password for each time interval.

## HOTP

Conversely, HOTP (HMAC-Based One-Time Password) is an event-based OTP algorithm.
Similar to TOTP, it also relies on a shared “seed” or “constant factor” between
the user and the service provider. However, unlike TOTP’s time-based moving
factor, HOTP employs a counter as the moving factor. Every time the user
generates a token, the counter increments, leading to a new and distinct token
for each successive event, such as a login attempt. TOTP is HOTP with the
counter value being time.

### SHA1 and HMAC SHA1

SHA1 is a cryptographic hash function that converts data into a fixed-length
string of characters (40 characters in the case of SHA1). It has a critical
property: even a minor change in the input results in a vastly different output.
However, SHA1 is susceptible to a “length extension attack,” which could
compromise its security.

To address this issue, the HMAC SHA1 algorithm was introduced. HMAC stands for
“Hash-based Message Authentication Code,” and it enhances the security of the
hash function by incorporating a secret key in the process.

### TOTP Implementation

Algorithm The implementation of the TOTP algorithm involves several steps.
First, the “secret” is decoded using the base32 algorithm. Why base32? It’s
because our secret is supposed to be safe and therefore we use any character
that ASCII encoding supports.

<img src="/images/2fa/table.webp" />

With ASCII encoding, we can write 256 different characters and that also
includes control characters that are not possible to print with a normal
keyboard.

So we use Base32 encoding that allows us to express any ASCII character with
only 32 characters. (A to Z and 2 to 7)

The current time is then rounded to 30-second intervals using the Unix time
format. This time value is converted into a hexadecimal number and passed to the
HMAC SHA1 function along with the shared “secret”. The resulting hash is used as
the time-based token.

<img src="/images/2fa/base.webp" />

To simplify the process for the user, the token is further reduced to a 6-digit
code using dynamic truncation. The user is then required to enter this 6-digit
code during the login process, which significantly improves usability while
maintaining security.

## QR Code for 2FA Activation

When enabling 2FA, users often use a QR code to set up the authentication
method. This QR code contains all the necessary information for the TOTP
algorithm, including the shared secret. Scanning the QR code with a mobile
device’s camera quickly sets up the 2FA, making the process faster and more
error-resistant.

PS: While this article provides a glimpse into the fascinating world of TOTP
2-factor authentication, it’s important to note that the topic is vast and
there’s much more to explore. In the interest of keeping this article concise,
several aspects have not been covered, including various cryptographic
algorithms, security protocols, and implementation nuances that play crucial
roles in the successful deployment of TOTP for different services.
